so
the x in x1 stands for x-rays so i
suppose we'd better have a little bit of
a look
at some of the relevant history of
x-rays and what they are
before we get started so we know what
we're talking about
and it really starts with devices like
this
a crooks tube you might remember them
from school or university
a sealed glass tube with most of the gas
removed and
a couple of electrodes electrode at one
end
and then another one in the foot at the
near end there
with the cruciform across mounted as the
metal electrode and so
the negative end is the far end the
the one on the right where if you see
the red glow
and you've got a high voltage between
the cathode the negative end at that
end and the end with the cross the anode
the positive end
and not only does the remaining gas
inside the
glass tube end up glowing but
something glows green at this end
on the uh rounded end of the
tube and has a very nice and sharply
defined shadow of the anode
showing there and
this was uh quite a subject of study
very mysterious as to what was causing
this effect
what you notice is that the uh whatever
it is that's coming out of the cathode
and traveling through the
uh near vacuum must be traveling in very
good
straight lines because it's producing a
very sharp
shadow and that was the fundamental
demonstration that there was some sort
of radiation or particles traveling in a
straight line
and this chap william rontgen looks like
a classic mad scientist here and he's
got a crooks tube
in the picture on the right there who's
working with it
and he noticed that when he was doing so
that
a board covered in phosphorus compounds
across the other side of the laboratory
would start glowing when the crooks tube
was turned on
and it would even do so in the case
where it was covered by
a layer of paper or thin card
and what he realized from this was that
he had discovered
a new form of radiation that must be
coming from the crooks tube
and was penetrating through that thin
cardboard
and causing the phosphorescence on his
uh specially coated board
because he went on from there
and started producing uh amazing
pictures here the first x-rays of a
human hand
they've got his assistant excuse me i'm
just letting some more people
into the uh meeting who have joined us
right so you can see here the bones in
the hand and the soft tissue in a sort
of lighter gray color
but particularly the metal there of the
wedding ring
or the uh trinkets around the wrist
blocking
the uh penetration of the x-rays very
effectively
and so he started to to realize that
this might have all sorts of interesting
applications
so what are these x-rays well they're
part of the electromagnetic spectrum
and this diagram really shows the whole
of the electromagnetic spectrum as we
understand it
with the long wavelengths on the left in
the terms of radio where the wavelength
is about the size of a building
through to shorter radio waves and
microwaves where
the wavelengths in the order of
centimeters
so the size of people or
the size of your hand the microwaves
that use for cooking
are 12 centimeters long and then you
come down to
things the size of insects smaller than
that we get into the
infrared radiation and we're down to the
sort of
the size of um a uh
tip of a needle or something like that
into the visible part you find that you
can study single celled
uh protozoa like amoeba but you
start to lose the ability to go any
further in the visible part because the
wavelength becomes comparable with the
size of the object
ultraviolet is good for molecules x-rays
you know into the realms of atoms and
gamma rays right down into the realms of
the atomic nucleus
so a huge range in wavelengths
15 powers of 10 shown on this diagram
and the visible part of course is just
that tiny little section
in the middle there but the x-rays are
really quite
short wavelength and very high energy
and what grunting realized was that what
was going on in those crooks tubes
was that the heated filament at the
cathode
was releasing electrons boiling away
from the metal
they were being accelerated across the
gap by
the high voltage picking up a lot of
energy
and then striking the metal in the
cruciform in the anode and it was the
electron
striking the the metal that was causing
that metal to then
release the x-rays in various directions
and so now this is a more up-to-date
diagram of a
an x-ray gun that you would use when
you're going for a medical x-ray
um to attempt to produce a fairly
narrow beam by having a slug of metal
mounted
solidly and at an angle so the x-rays
tend to come out one side
and you get them more directed and then
of course they put shielding rounds the
rest of it
to stop it going in every direction and
so
the effect is you have quite an intense
beam of electrons coming from your x-ray
gun here
you shine it through whatever part of
the
patient is of interest and put the
photographic plate behind it
and the x-rays cause the image to be
cast onto the plate
fairly straightforward idea but we've
gone beyond that
these days rather than just these simple
two-dimensional shadow casts
that you're probably familiar with we
have these amazing machines
called ct scanners or cat scanners and
the patient goes inside the machine and
what you have is a circular track
which carries a detector and
an x-ray gun mounted 180 degrees apart
and it shines a beam of x-rays through
and then steps around until the whole
lot has rotated through 360 degrees
so it's put a beam of x-rays through at
every possible angle
and picked up the resulting intensity
and then with some very clever
mathematics
um you can do an inversion of the
data that you get and create a 3d
map of what's going on inside the
patient so you get a 3d
x-ray and next week's talk is about
how to cat scan the whole universe and
so we'll come back to that then
so what about x-rays specifically in
astronomy
and this is an iconic picture here of
the chandra
spacecraft and uh an image of the bullet
cluster
where the red pinky material is actually
x-ray emissions as a key piece of
evidence to do with
the subject of dark matter in this
photograph but that's the subject of a
whole different talk
but you notice we were talking about
using a spacecraft the problem with
x-ray astronomy is that our atmosphere
acts as a very effective shield for all
of the high energy
parts of the electromagnetic spectrum
everything from ultraviolet
right through x-rays and gamma rays is
very efficiently
blocked by our atmosphere
and so this chart at the bottom here
tries to show that uh that that almost
the uh none of the gamma rays or x-rays
make it to the ground
until you get down into the ultraviolet
when it starts to let
things through our optical telescopes
work
as do our eyes on the visible part of
the spectrum down here
and some of the infrared light gets
through some doesn't
some is absorbed by things like water
and carbon dioxide and so on
then a huge slug of the infrared and
into the
microwave region is absorbed and then
there's the
window where radio telescopes operate
down here
but again once you get beyond a certain
length of
wavelength it goes back to blocking and
so
if we want to observe anything really
but infrared or
optical or radio then we need to get
above the atmosphere
and the ideal way to do that of course
is to go to space
and so perhaps the most famous x-ray
telescope is this one
chandra a very unusual looking shape you
can see the classic
uh solar panels and the lens cap open on
this end
and but the great long length of the uh
tube there is a giveaway that there's
something unusual about this telescope
it's a very long for its diameter
and that all comes down to the fact that
it's very difficult indeed
to focus x-rays with normal
light it's easy we bounce the light off
a mirror
or we bend it through a lens
but no one has ever managed to make an
x-ray lens
most material is sufficiently light
in density that the x-rays just pass
straight through it
um otherwise the initial application of
using it to
create shadow mask x-rays in medical
applications just wouldn't work
and likewise it's quite difficult to
reflect x-rays
but they have developed a very cunning
technique for
producing a focused image which is used
in these sorts of telescopes
and it uses two or more sets
of concentric metal mirrors
that are figured either in parabolic or
hyperbolic
shapes to arrange for the incoming
x-rays that come in
more or less parallel to be deflected
into a focal point
and then of course you can put your
camera down at the
focus there and make an image and as it
shows in this diagram you have to have
them be very long indeed it's typically
meters i think chandra might even be 15
meters long
and this works because of a phenomenon
called
grazing incidence if we have a mirror
typical optical mirror
light would come in and strike the
mirror surface
and bounce off with the usual
law of reflection of the equal angle and
even if it comes in at a very narrow
angle it will still bounce off
like this x-rays though when they come
in
from a steep angle against the mirror
they will just go straight through as if
there's nothing there
but if you arrange them to be coming in
with grazing incidents
at a very very narrow angle like this
then you can
get them to reflect and that's shown in
the diagram on the right
that uh the angle that you get depends
on the characteristics
of the refractive index of the material
what's really happening
is that the x-rays
are so short in wavelength that the gaps
between the atoms
appear very wide to them and so they
sail straight through without
really hitting an atom at all most of
the time
but if you come in at a very very narrow
angle
then those gaps appear to close up it's
a bit like looking
at a post and rail fence if you look at
it
from 90 degrees face on you can see
almost straight through the fence the
posts
really don't provide any obscuring
nature
but if you go and stand right next to
the fence and look along the fence line
then you'll find that all of the fence
posts add up
to uh a complete obscuring of uh your
view through it
and that's what these these things try
to do they try to
bounce the x-rays off at grazing
incidents
once twice sometimes even three times to
increase the degree of uh
coning into a focus
and it's amazing what we can do with
them here's the triangulum galaxy m33
shown in a combination of optical and
infrared light on the left
and the x-ray view of it on the right
and you can see it's really quite a
sharp image none of your
blurry nature to to this um you can
make out individual really hot star
clusters in the middle there
and very hot gas as well i say very hot
because it's hot things that produce
high energy light in the form of x-rays
cool things of course produce low energy
light in the form of infrared
so back to the story of the specific
object we're going to talk about uh this
afternoon and that's
cygnus x1 was first discovered
actually by a mission inside the
atmosphere
but launched high up into it on a rocket
so-called sounding rocket sent up into
the stratosphere
from the white sands missile base in
america
carrying with it geiger counters that
could detect
incoming x-rays and
they scanned the sky by
spinning the rocket so the geiger
counter's view rotated around
and then as the rocket tipped over it
would sweep across the sky as well
so it created quite a wide field of view
for the experiment
and they actually used this and detected
a number of x-ray sources
coming from this deep space and
we're talking about uh radiation here
with wavelengths
around a tenth of a nanometer so um
that's uh one hundredth the size of uh
an atom or something like that
now they tracked down eight of these
x-ray sources
from that particular experiment to an
approximate region
in the sky and this particular one the
bright the first one they discovered
they named cygnus x1 because of its
position
in cygnus roughly along the neck of
cygnus the swan there
but obviously with uh just a geiger
counter and a spinning rocket
you don't get very good spatial accuracy
and so they had a sort of vague idea
that it was in cygnus
um but not a particularly uh refined
location for it
so the next step was the first x-ray
satellite which was
uhuru and that found 300 more
x-ray sources in the sky in the 1970s
but again the detection accuracy wasn't
very good
in terms of being able to pin these
things down to an exact spot on the sky
but the next year the radio astronomers
got in on the act
and two different teams of radio
astronomers were scanning the sky
and found a radio source that they were
able to pin
down to quite a narrow angle just next
door to the star eta cigna
so that's the fourth magnitude star
that's in the uh
the neck of the swan there on that map
that we had just now
but the real discovery the real first
image of it actually goes to the balloon
launched missions
quite incredible these would send a uh
looks like a dustbin doesn't it going up
on the
uh tail there of a high altitude balloon
way up into the stratosphere
now these of course have the advantage
that they can
hang around for quite a long time and
make lots of observations
um over and over again rather than a
rocket which only had a very
brief uh flight time
and this actually produced the first
bright x-ray image
shown in the middle there of cygnus x1
still nobody knows what it is at this
point though there's a great mystery
but it wasn't long before they noticed
that when you studied it
and looked at it with it various
instruments
you noticed that the brightness the
power output of it
was flickering on a time scale of
several times per second so
0.3 of a second or thereabouts
and that's a very fundamental
thing to notice about an object because
the whatever the energy source
is if it's flickering
in under a second then it must be less
than one
light second in size
um and 0.3 of a light second is around
000 kilometers
and that's 15 times smaller than the sun
this the sun is about 1.45
million kilometers in um radius i think
so really quite a tiny object
and the reason for that is that whatever
the physical process is that's causing
the uh the thing to brighten and fade
in the process of flickering some of the
light is going to be coming to us from
the near side
and some from the far side and so the
flicker will begin when the nearside
light arrives
and will continue to be observed until
the light from the far
side has arrived and the difference
in the time of flight is the speed of
light divided by the
size of the object so if there is a very
quick flicker then it must be a very
small difference in the flight times
between the near and far
side of the object and so you can
constrain the physical size of this
thing
now that's very interesting because this
is a very bright source
and if it's very bright and very small
then it means it must be very very hot
indeed
but the optical astronomers are now
getting involved because they've got a
location to go after
and what they notice at this particular
point in the sky
is a blue supergiant star
mass estimates 20 to 40 times the mass
of the sun
and blue hot temperature of 31 000
degrees kelvin
and about 5 million years old
and this is uh in a cloud of
such super giant stars about 6 000 light
years from the earth 6070
they now measure the distance as
and whilst there's a certain amount of
uh
gas and dust in the middle that's uh
between
us and the object there that's uh
dimming it making it appear less bright
uh if it wasn't for that intervening
dust this would be a star
that would be really quite bright and we
would see it with the naked eye
but um actually it's uh dimmed
sufficiently
by all of the dust that we need a
telescope to spot it
turns out that this is one member of a
group of
such hot blue supergiant stars
in what's called the cygnus ob3
association
there's a partial diagram of the galaxy
here's the sun
and the nucleus of the galaxy in the
middle here
and we live just in the unfashionable uh
suburbs of the orion spur here
which is a thin and weedy bit of spiral
arm
and if you trace the orion spur back it
merges back here
with the sagittarius arm and it's
at about that merge point about 6 000
light years away
that this large cluster of
these very hot blue stars
exists and the diagram on the right
shows with little yellow rings around
them all of the
main members of cygnus ob3 all of these
stars that were probably all formed
around five million
to seven million years ago in a uh
collapsing nebula and then have begun to
scatter themselves
around the galaxy all on their own
independent orbits
and the cygnus x-1 blue supergiant is
one of the outliers of the group over on
this side here it's
actually probably the one that's
furthest from the
biggest member of the group weighs in at
40 times the
mass of the sun and the fact that we
still see that
means that uh
anything with a mass of 40 solar masses
or less is probably still
carrying on its life as a main sequence
star
but anything over that has probably um
suffered the usual massive star
death process of exploding as a
supernova
perhaps uh turning into what's called a
wolf reyette star
first and we still see the uh
cygnus x one star is around about a 20
to 40
solar mass star so it's under that limit
that all makes perfect sense um but
we don't really think that the blue
supergiant can be the source of the
x-rays
for one thing it's too large that fast
flickering
really would preclude it being able to
be
such a large star
studies of the um
blue supergiant revealed that when we
look at its
spectral lines in great detail the
lines in the spectrum are moving to the
right and left in the spectrum to higher
and lower energies
being blue and red shifted as it is
orbiting
a massive companion and we don't see
that companion
here's the the graph of the doppler
effect
and so what's happening is that the two
stars or two objects are orbiting around
each other
every 5.6 days which is quite a tight
orbit
it's only 0.2 astronomical units that's
um
roughly the same size as mercury's orbit
perhaps actually even smaller
and the whole thing's tilted by 48
degrees
compared to our line of sight so we
don't see it as an eclipsing binary
we don't see the one star getting in
front of the other at any point
because of that but given that we have a
mass estimate for the blue component
and we understand kepler's laws and
newton's laws of gravity we can work out
that the other companion that we haven't
detected has a mass
of 14.8 solar masses
now that's way too big for it to be a
neutron star
neutron star would top out at about two
and a half to three solar masses
what's called the tolman oppenheimer
volkov limit
any more mass than that and gravity wins
and turns you into a black hole so we're
way above that mass um
and this tends to suggest
that the only candidate for a small
compact object
and remember that fast flickering means
it must be small
um for it to be
that massive suggests that it's probably
a black hole
um the size for a black hole event
horizon for
a 14.8 solar mass object would be 44
kilometers
which is much much less than the 100 000
that we had as the upper limit from that
flickering
but nevertheless this could well be the
the answer
however instrumentation improved rapidly
1973 they managed to
measure the brightness flickering
on time scales not of a fraction of a
second but down into the
milliseconds and that means that
we're talking about an object that is
one
light millisecond in diameter
and that's a thousandth of um a light
second
which works out to be 300 kilometers
and so it's a no greater than 300
kilometers in size and a black hole
would be 44 kilometers
for that mass so we're starting to
really bring these two estimates
quite close together
again it's all down to that difference
in the arrival time
there's a diagram showing that
flickering you can see the brightness
here over time
really a lot of very spiky
uh sharp peaks in the brightness there
indicating
very very rapid changes in the power
output
now jumping forward about uh 20 years we
think we've detected the event horizon
of this black hole now
we've looked at the spectrum of light
from
mata falling in towards the black hole
and being eaten by it
and you can see how the
light coming from the matter that's
falling in
gradually takes on a greater and greater
red shift as it falls down the gravity
well
until um it suddenly disappears
and if it was falling in and hitting
some solid object there would be a flash
of energy due to the impact as the uh
mass of the incoming object was absorbed
but that's not what happens when it
passes through an event horizon into a
black hole you just see
a dying pulse train which fades away and
that is what this uh
is observing here from the mata falling
in
very much consistent with the idea that
the black hole is eating material
and so we put all of that together and
we get an artist's impression
of what's going on here the two objects
are quite close together the blue
supergiant
and its companion a black hole
and because the blue supergiant has gone
into the giant star phase and expanded
its outer layers
they are no longer as tightly held to
the main star
and the strong gravity of its companion
here is able to pull the material across
in a bridge of
in-falling matter which goes into a
death spiral
into a what's called an accretion disk
and as it spirals inwards
um it loses gravitational energy and
that turns into
kinetic energy of motion and then the
material crashing together causes it to
get very very hot
and so the inner part of the accretion
disc
can end up at a very very high
temperature
it's just a diagram of effectively
what's going on with gravity
if you have two objects both with sort
of roughly equal masses
there's a point of balance between them
which you can easily work out it's just
in the ratio of their masses
and anything within this lobe
is attached to this star anything that's
within this lobe is attached to this one
but any matter from this star that
escapes
in the form of its solar wind or other
ejecta coming out as criminal mass
ejections
is going to sink
down and be captured by the gravity of
the
companion
now we can also look at this x-ray
emission
in more detail by looking at the
spectrum of it
to try to work out what the material is
made of
there's a diagram here of a little x-ray
spectrometer we have our x-ray tube or
x-ray gun again with a cathode
and a slug of metal and we bounce the
x-rays off
our sample onto a crystal that acts
like a diffraction grating um
all of the nicely arranged atoms in the
crystal
act like lots of very uh tightly ruled
lines and bounce the x-rays off the
crystal
at an angle that depends on their
wavelength so we can split them up
in the same way that we use diffraction
gratings or prisms to
split up visible light and when you do
that
for a particular sample of material here
you get a spectrum that looks something
like this
very neatly stylized
and it composes two parts one
is the typical curve here with uh
a rise to a maximum and then a long slow
tail off down to longer wavelengths
so this is the high energy end short
wavelengths is a maximum cut off
and then the longer lower energy
wavelengths down this side but it's
superimposed on this
so-called black body curve that you get
here which is just thermal emission of
x-rays
due to it being very hot you get
particular
emission lines caused by particular
elements
and those it turns out are extremely
useful
in telling us exactly what something is
made of
because in one of the best results in
science i think
this is moseley's law for the
wavelength of the
emitted x-rays for different
elements each element has a
characteristic
atomic number which is just the number
of protons
the number of positive charges in the
nucleus
and so element number three here at this
end would be lithium
and we would go all the way along here
and
number 26 would be iron and so on
and if you look at the position of the
emission lines for the
highest energy emission line you get a
lovely
fit of a straight line here on this
graph
it's actually plotting the square root
of the wavelength up here
that's because of that z squared in the
uh formula but we won't go into the
maths
so a beautiful fit so if you measure the
wavelength
you can immediately read off which
element it was
in a very straightforward whodunit and
that's because
the process that's involved is
that um the incoming electron
is hitting an electron in the material
of the sample it might be an x-ray
coming in it doesn't make have to be an
electron
but it hits it and knocks it clean out
of the
nucleus for clean out of the atom
and then what happens is that the next
nearest
highest electron in the second orbit
around the nucleus
drops down from orbit two to orbit one
and when it does so it gives out a
characteristic
quantum of energy which carries
corresponds exactly to um
a particular wavelength in the x-ray
spectrum
and the energy of these levels depends
entirely
in a nice manner on the number of
positive charges that are doing the
attracting
of the electrons and because it's the
innermost electrons that are involved
there's no problem about the interaction
with all of the other
electrons in the atom they are outside
of this
and so this particular transition gives
us that very very
characteristic and easy to understand
spectrum
however when you put it into practice
it's a little bit more complicated
this is the x-ray spectrum of cygnus x1
um this uh line along the top here
is the observed spectrum gets a little
bit
fuzzy down at this end because uh these
are the very
high end energy
photons and it was getting harder to
measure them but
what it's composed of is three pieces
it's composed of the black body
radiation curve
and the
iron emission line there's a lot of
iron this is because there's generally a
lot of iron
formed in the nuclear processes that go
on
in giant stars and so we get quite a lot
of iron
in the material that's doing the x-ray
emitting
and it shows up as a little bump there
but we can measure the peak of that and
attribute it to iron very closely and so
the overall spectrum is the sum of the
disc
the accretion disks black bodies thermal
spectrum
um and the iron in the corona
that's above that and the corona itself
which is the hot gas
that surrounds the accretion disk and
you have to try and
take apart all three of those and
produce a model to work out what's going
on
i just wanted to show you that it all
sounds very simple in theory but really
these things get rather complicated in
practice
now here's a picture of cygnus x1 taken
from
the chandra space telescope so you can
see it just
shows uh a very bright center getting
fainter towards the the edge but it's
really quite a high resolution image
and here's the spectrum that comes from
that image again it's
fairly grotty you can see the error bars
on every
item here but this peak which mostly
consists of one point you notice
um but it's relatively easy to identify
the eye is quite good at picking them
out
that is the uh the ionized iron
near the accretion disk so it's again
showing that it's uh
a
process involving a black hole
particularly because
that peak has been gravitationally
red-shifted
we talked earlier about light climbing
out of a gravity well being
shifted towards the red well
this um peak has been shifted towards
the red
by the mass of the black hole so we can
work out
how far from the black hole the
uh emission is coming because we can
work out the position
in the gravity field and we can also see
that the peak is rather broadened and
that's because the accretion disk is
spinning
and so we can measure how fast that's
so you can see that using these the
details in this spectra we can start to
build up a very good picture of what's
going on
so we think that the disc of mata is
really quite thin
but about 30 000 kilometers
overall diameter now if you've been
listening you'll say wait a minute
that's a larger number than the 300
kilometers that we've narrowed down
the uh size of the thing to for the
from flickering well it's really the
x-rays are being
produced right in the central ten
percent here
or one percent of the region um in the
300 kilometers
that's where the material is hot enough
to produce these x-rays that we were
looking at as regards the flickering
and the accretion disk temperature is
much lower further out
but you also notice in this diagram
we've got these jets drawn
again this is an artist's impression i
wish it was a photograph but it's not
and these jets are spun up by the
magnetic field the black hole itself
is spinning very fast indeed
and that twists the magnetic field
in the vicinity up into a very tortuous
uh
twisted um jet coming off the spin axis
north and south and the gas can get
trapped
in that and accelerated as the
processes of the magnetic field lines
snap and reconnect
can get accelerated to near speed of
light
type velocities and shot out along the
jets
um so not all of the matter that spirals
in ends up falling into the black hole
quite a lot of it in fact is shot out
along those jets
and we can see the effect of the jet
here is a
marvelous photograph of the region
around
cygnus x1 um this over here is this is
called the chu hep
nebula um but
uh cygnus x1 is is here this is the blue
supergiant
that it's next to and this arc across
the top here this blue arc
is where one of the jets of cygnus x1 is
pointing up this way
and then colliding with the outer gas of
the tulip nebula
and dumping its energy into a sort of
hemisphere
and we're looking at it side on so we
see a sort of brightened
arc as the rim of that hemisphere i've
got a black and white photograph
of it again there's the the lovely tulip
nebula
here's cygnus x1 um here
and it's sending two jets out one in
this direction and one up here
and producing that arc so if we just pop
back you can see
that blue arc there
slightly different scale on those
pictures
and most recently the observations have
started to be made of
cygnus x1 and even higher energies
looking right into the very very central
region of that accretion disk
and looking at gamma rays coming from it
so this is a result
from 2006 showing
100 giga electron volt gamma rays these
are very very high energies indeed
it's the sort of energies that we
produce in some of our
particle accelerators like the large
hadron collider
and evidently nature is doing those
sorts of experiments
in and around cygnus x1
and this is the first time we've
detected this sort of
really high energy emissions coming from
a stellar mass black hole
so i think we're very sure now that this
is a black hole it really can't be
anything else
at all of the modeling of accretion
disks and the spectra and all of the
other evidence
the flickering and the size all points
to that
but it was the subject of a friendly
wager between
two great scientists stephen hawking
shown on the left there of course
and kip thorne on the right kip thorns
published quite a number of books on uh
black holes
and they had a bet and stephen bet
that cygnus x-1 was not a black hole
um effectively betting against his
life's work on black holes existing
um and he said it was an insurance
policy but
finally in 1990 so actually 30 years ago
now
he actually conceded that all of this
data that we've been talking about today
added up to uh so much of an
overwhelming case
for cygnus x1 being a black hole that
was eating its neighbor
that he had to concede and just finally
we've got a final image here of the uh
tulip nebula superimposed with an
enlarged picture of
cygnus x1 there and the star clouds of
cygnus all around with a lot of those
other hot blue
cygnus ob3 stars that you can see
and i just want to say a little bit
about the life cycle of
cygnus x1
so the companion star is perhaps say 25
solar masses and about 5 to 7
million years old
its companion as pre whatever it was
in the first place has produced a 15
solar mass black hole that's really
quite
big as these things go i think the
smallest one
we've discovered is five solar masses so
it's three times that minimum limit
so it must have been a very large star
and we know it must have been very large
because
the two stars that are in the binary
pair the
supermassive black hole and x1 itself
would have been born together as part of
this
overall star-forming process in the ob3
association and they would have evolved
as stars do at a pace depending on their
mass
and so the higher mass object
always runs through its fuel more
quickly and reaches the end of its main
sequence
hydrogen burning phase first and
explodes as a supernova first
and so cygnus x1 must have been larger
than its current companion
at uh that 25 to 40 solar masses
indeed the rest of the cluster has a 40
solar mass
star there that still hasn't yet evolved
into
a black hole or blown up as a supernova
in any other way
and so the progenitor for cygnus x1 must
have been
more massive still than that so this
must have been
50 60 solar masses and so you would have
had
that running through its life cycle with
its companion
as a main sequence star
x1 exploded later on the slightly
lighter companion has now uh
it's fully expanded into a blue
supergiant
and is due to explode anytime soon and
it too will form a black hole
and we will then have a pair of black
holes orbiting around each other
only around 0.2 astronomical units apart
and of course as we know they will
spiral in towards each other
giving off gravity waves as they do and
eventually merge and so
in the future it's going to be an
absolutely fascinating uh
thing to watch but sadly i think we've
got about another 500
000 years to wait before uh the
companion
uh let's go as a supernova so we won't
be around to see it but future
generations of scientists
i hope will be watching it with great
interest
and that's it thank you very much for
listening